[docs] Document the new editing API (#4060)
mui/mui-x: docs/data/data-grid/editing/editing.md

> To avoid having to wait for the next major release window, all breaking changes needed were included inside this flag.
>
> If you are looking for the documentation for the default editing API, visit [this page](/components/data-grid/editing-legacy/).
> Note that it is encouraged to migrate to the new editing API since it will be enabled by default in v6.
> Although it says "experimental", you can consider it as stable.

## Making a column editable

You can make a column editable by enabling the `editable` property in its [column definition](/api/data-grid/grid-col-def/):

```tsx
<DataGrid columns={[{ field: 'name', editable: true }]} />
```

This will enable the cell editing for the specified column.
Note that there is also a row editing mode accessible by setting the `editMode` prop to `"row"`.
For more information, see the dedicated [section](#row-editing).

The following demo shows an example of how to make the Name column editable.
Play with it by double-clicking or pressing <kbd class="key">Enter</kbd> in any cell from this column.

{{"demo": "BasicEditingGrid.js", "bg": "inline", "defaultCodeOpen": false}}

### Start editing

> These are the ways to start editing a cell (or row if `editMode="row"`):

Reviewer: In general, I prefer to avoid the passive voice whenever possible. Try something like this to keep it conversational while bringing more clarity to who is performing the action:

> You can modify the filters through the grid interface in several different ways.

Applying that to the specific case of line 42 here, you could go with something like this:

> You can start editing a cell using any of the following interactions:

- Double-clicking a cell.
- Pressing <kbd class="key">Enter</kbd>, <kbd class="key">Backspace</kbd> or <kbd class="key">Delete</kbd>.
  Note that the existing content in the cell is first cleared if <kbd class="key">Backspace</kbd> or <kbd class="key">Delete</kbd> is pressed.
- Pressing any printable key, for instance `a`, `E`, `0`, or `$`.

> - Calling `apiRef.current.startCellEditMode` passing the ID and field of the cell.

Author: No problem to always use "row ID".

  ```tsx

>   apiRef.current.startCellEditMode({ id: 1, field: 'name' });

Author: "cell editing" is the name of the feature. It could create confusion like if the feature was disabled by default and `startCellEditing` had to be called to first enable the cell editing capability, not to make a cell editable. With row editing is worse I think. AG Grid calls `startEditingCell` which states clearly that it will start editing a specific cell.

I reused "mode" because we already had this concept of "cell mode" throughout the grid, e.g. `cellMode` prop. `startCellEditMode` and `stopCellEditMode` is essentially a split of `setCellMode`. I can change if everybody agrees.

>   apiRef.current.startCellEditMode({ id: 1, field: 'name' });

Reviewer 2: The name feels heavy
But I agree that we should aim for clarity.
So if we don't find anything better I fine with letting the current names.

>   apiRef.current.startCellEditMode({ id: 1, field: 'name' });

Author: `startCellEditing` contains the name of the feature. For row editing, `startRowEditing` is confusing since the feature is disabled (unless `editMode="row"`). I can change to `startEditingCell`.

>   apiRef.current.startCellEditMode({ id: 1, field: 'name' });

Author: One thing to consider is that in #4210 we'll have a `cellModesModel` prop to control the mode of the cells without using the imperative API. The concept of "cell mode" we'll hide here will become more present with this prop. We can try other names keeping the "mode". The idea is that a cell has two modes: "view" and "edit". These methods change which mode is active. It may makes more sense to use `putCellIntoEditMode` or `changeCellToEditMode`.

  ```

- Calling `apiRef.current.startRowEditMode` passing the ID of the row (only available if `editMode="row"`).

  ```tsx

>   apiRef.current.startRowEditMode({ id: 1 });

Author: Moving the discussion to https://github.com/mui/mui-x/pull/4060#discussion_r820885213

Once a cell is in edit mode, any of the following interactions will stop the edit mode and, depending on the action, save or discard the changes made:

- Pressing <kbd class="key">Escape</kbd> stops the edit mode and reverts the changes.
- Pressing <kbd class="key">Tab</kbd> or <kbd class="key">Enter</kbd> saves the changes and stops the edit mode.
  In the case of <kbd class="key">Enter</kbd> it will also move the focus to the cell immediatelly below the current one.
- Clicking outside the cell (or row) being edited saves the new value and stops the edit mode.
- Calling `apiRef.current.stopCellEditMode({ id, field })` passing the ID and field of the cell.

  ```tsx
  apiRef.current.stopCellEditMode({ id: 1, field: 'name' });

  // or

  apiRef.current.stopCellEditMode({
    id: 1,
    field: 'name',
    ignoreModifications: true, // will also discard the changes made
  });
  ```

- Calling `apiRef.current.stopRowEditMode` passing the ID of the row (only available if `editMode="row"`).

  ```tsx
  apiRef.current.stopRowEditMode({ id: 1 });

  // or

  apiRef.current.stopRowEditMode({
    id: 1,
    ignoreModifications: true, // will also discard the changes made
  });
  ```

> ### Control cell editability

Reviewer: +1 for replacing "editability."

I would go with this:

> ### Disable cell editing

> ### Control cell editability

Reviewer 2: The feature allows to disable the editing for some cells, whether we are in "row editing" (edit whole row at once) or "cell editing" (edit each cell independently)

So talking about "cell editing" may be confusing here

> ### Control cell editability

Author: I copied this title from the old docs. I don't like it but couldn't come with something better. To help to find a  better title its full meaning is "make some cells, from an already editable column, not editable". The main advantage of using it is that you have access to the row. It doesn't make sense to use it if the column is not editable. What about?

```suggestion
### Disable cell editability per row
```

or

```suggestion
### Make some cells not editable from individual rows
```

> ### Control cell editability

Reviewer: How about this?

```suggestion
### Disable editing in specific cells within a row
```

The `editable` property controls which cells are editable at the column level.

> To give flexibility, the `isCellEditable` callback prop allows to go further and define which cells are editable in each row.

Author: I went with the second option. The previous phrase already begins with "the".

It is called with a [`GridCellParams`](/api/data-grid/grid-cell-params/) object and must return `true` if the cell is editable, or `false` if not.

In the following demo, only the rows with an even `Age` value are editable.
The editable cells have a green background for better visibility.

{{"demo": "IsCellEditableGrid.js", "bg": "inline"}}

## Value parser and value setter

A value parser allows to modify the value entered by the user.
It can be used, for instance, to convert the value sent by the edit component to a different format.

> To define a value parser, pass a function to the `valueParser` property in the column definition:

Author: I went with the first option.

```tsx
const columns: GridColDef[] = [
  {
    valueParser: (value: GridCellValue, params: GridCellParams) => {
      return value.toLowerCase();
    },
  },
];
```

In the other hand, a value setter customizes how the row is updated with the new value.
If you are already using a `valueGetter` to extract the value from a nested object, then the `valueSetter` will do the inverse task.
To define a value setter, pass a function to the `valueSetter` property in the column definition.
It will be called with an object containing the new value to be saved and the row where this value belongs to.

```tsx
const columns: GridColDef[] = [
  {
    valueSetter: (params: GridValueSetterParams) => {
      const [firstName, lastName] = params.value!.toString().split(' ');
      return { ...params.row, firstName, lastName };
    },
  },
];
```

In the following demo, both value parser and value setter were defined for the "Full name" column.
The value parser converts the value entered to uppercase while the value setter splits the value and saves it correctly into the row object:

{{"demo": "ValueParserSetterGrid.js", "bg": "inline", "defaultCodeOpen": false}}

## Events

> The mouse and keyboard interactions that [start](#start-editing) and [stop](#stop-editing) the cell editing will fire, respectively, the events `cellEditStart` and `cellEditStop`.

Reviewer 3: For beginners who are not familiar with events
```suggestion
The mouse and keyboard interactions that [start](#start-editing) and [stop](#stop-editing) the cell editing will fire, respectively, the [events](/components/data-grid/events/) `cellEditStart` and `cellEditStop`.
```

For row editing, the events are `rowEditStart` and `rowEditStop`.
You can control how these events are handled and customize the behavior of the cell editing or row editing.

For convenience, you can also listen to these events using their equivalent props:

- `onCellEditStart`
- `onCellEditStop`
- `onRowEditStart`
- `onRowEditStop`

> The events and props are called with an object contaning the row ID and field that is being edited.

Author: Updated but I kept "ID". It was a suggestion from Matt he gave in https://github.com/mui/mui-x/pull/3387#discussion_r793131457

> The events and props are called with an object contaning the row ID and field that is being edited.

Reviewer 2: In that case we have a lot of places to update in a follow up PR for consistency

> Also, the object contains a `reason` param specifying which type of interaction caused the event to be fired (e.g. `cellDoubleClick` for when a double-click starts the edit mode).

Reviewer 3: It looks like `cellDoubleClick` is a variable

```suggestion
Also, the object contains a `reason` param specifying which type of interaction caused the event to be fired (e.g. `'cellDoubleClick'` for when a double-click starts the edit mode).
```
```suggestion
Also, the object contains a `reason` param specifying which type of interaction caused the event to be fired (e.g. `GridEvents.cellDoubleClick` for when a double-click starts the edit mode).
```

If that condition is true, it [disables](/components/data-grid/events/#disabling-the-default-behavior) the default event behavior.
The only ways to stop editing a cell now is to press <kbd class="key">Enter</kbd>, <kbd class="key">Escape</kbd> or <kbd class="key">Tab</kbd>.

{{"demo": "DisableStopEditModeOnFocusOut.js", "bg": "inline"}}

### Disabling default start and stop behavior

The following demo shows how external buttons can be used to start and stop the edit mode.
For this, the default behavior of the `onCellEditXXX` events was disabled.
To edit a cell, first click it, then click in the Edit button.

{{"demo": "StartEditButtonGrid.js", "bg": "inline", "defaultCodeOpen": false}}

## Validation

If the column definition sets a callback for the `preProcessEditCellProps` property, then it will be called each time a new value is entered into a cell from this column.
The general purpose of this property is to allow to pre-process the props that are passed to the edit component.
The `preProcessEditCellProps` callback will be called with an object contaning the following attributes:

- `id`: the row ID

> - `row`: the row object with values before the cell or row entered the edit mode

Author: I replaced all "row object" -> "row model".

- `props`: the props, containing the value after the value parser, that will be passed to the edit component
- `hasChanged`: determines if `props.value` is different from the last time this callback was called

One type of pre-processing that can be done with it is data validation.
To validate the data entered, pass a callback to `preProcessEditCellProps` checking if `props.value` is valid.

> If the new value is invalid, set `props.error` to a truthy value and return the mutated props, as shown in the example below.

Author: I replaced all "mutated" -> "modified". No problem to mutate them. We first clone the object.

When the user tries to save the changed value, if the error attribute is truthy (invalid) the value will not be saved.

```tsx
const columns: GridColDef[] = [
  {
    field: 'firstName',
    preProcessEditCellProps: (params: GridPreProcessEditCellProps) => {
      const hasError = params.props.value.length < 3;
      return { ...params.props, error: hasError };
    },
  },
];
```

> ⚠ Mutating `props.value` inside the callback has no effect. To pre-process it, use a [value parser](#value-parser-and-value-setter).

The demo below contains an example of server-side data validation.
The only difference, in comparison to the steps above, is that the callback returns a promise which resolves to the mutated props.
Note that the value passed to `props.error` is passed directly to the edit component as the `error` prop.
While the promise is not resolved, the edit component will receive an `isProcessingProps` prop with value equal to `true`.

> {{"demo": "ValidateServerNameGrid.js", "bg": "inline", "defaultCodeOpen": false}}

Reviewer 3: Only the green cell is editable and returns an error if the name is already used

> ⚠ If an interaction that saves and stops editing (e.g. pressing <kbd class="key">Enter</kbd>) occurs while processing the props, the changes made are discarded and the cell will immediatelly exit the edit mode.

> > To avoid losing the changes is important to communitate users about what is happening.

Author: The continuous form is "losing". I rephrased this and the next sentence.

> You can use the `isProcessingProps` prop to provide feedback while waiting the server to respond.

## Persistence

After executing one of the [stop editing](#stop-editing) interactions, the `processRowUpdate` prop will be called.
Use this prop to send the new values to the server and save it into a database or other storage method.
The prop is called with two arguments: the first being the updated row with the new values, and after passing through the value setter, and the second is the row before the current cell or row has entered the edit mode (a.k.a the original row).

> Once the row was saved, `processRowUpdate` must return the row object that will be used to update the internal state.

Author: This kinda makes the second argument useless because returning an empty object would have the same effect.

This value returned is used as argument to a call to `apiRef.current.updateRows`.

If while calling `processRowUpdate` you need to cancel the save process, like when a database validation fails or the user wants to reject the changes, there are two options:

- Reject the promise to not update the internal state and keep the cell in edit mode.
- Resolve the promise with the second argument (the original row) received to make it stop silently, not updating the internal state but exiting the edit mode.

The next demo implements the first option.
Instead of [validating](#validation) while typing, it validates in the server.
If the new name is empty it will not allow to save and the cell is kept into edit mode.
Also, it shows that `processRowUpdate` can be used to pre-process the row object that will be saved into the internal state.
To leave the edit mode, press <kbd class="key">Escape</kbd> or enter a valid name.

> {{"demo": "ServerSidePersistence.js", "bg": "inline", "defaultCodeOpen": false}}

Reviewer 3: I missed the snakbar. Maybe having it in top-middle or bottom-middle will make it more visible than in the bottom-left which is out of the reader's attention because of the navigation

Author: I changed to bottom-center.

### Ask confirmation before save

The second option to cancel the save process allows the user to reject the changes and return immediatelly to the view mode.
This is acomplished by resolving `processRowUpdate` with the second argument.

The following demo shows how this approach can be leveraged to ask a confirmation before sending the data to the server.
In case the user accepts the change, the internal state is updated with the values.
However, if the changes are rejected, no state is changed and the cell is reverted to its original value.
The demo also employs validation to prevent entering an empty name.

> {{"demo": "AskConfirmationBeforeSave.js", "bg": "inline", "defaultCodeOpen": false}}

Reviewer 3: Other columns (date created and last login) are never saved. They should be removed or not editable

Author: True, I disabled them.

## Create your own edit component

Each of the built-in column types provide a equivalent component to edit the value of the cells.
For custom defined columns or to override the existing components, you can provide a new edit component through the `renderEditCell` property in the column definition.

> This property works in a similar fashion to `renderCell`, rendered while cells are in view mode.

Author: I went with the 1st option.

```tsx
function CustomEditComponent(props: GridRenderEditCellParams) {
  return <input type="text" value={params.value} onChange={...}>;
}

const columns: GridColDef[] = [
  {
    field: 'firstName',
    renderEditCell: (params: GridRenderEditCellParams) => (
      return <CustomEditComponent {...params} />;
    ),
  },
];
```

> The `renderEditCell` property receives all params from `GridRenderEditCellParams`, based on `GridCellParams`.

Author: I missed one "extends".

For this task, pass the row ID, field and the new value to a call to `apiRef.current.setEditCellValue`.
The new value will be parsed and validated and the `value` prop will reflect it in the next render.

```tsx
function CustomEditComponent(props: GridRenderEditCellParams) {
  const { id, value, field } = props;
  const apiRef = useGridApiContext();

  const handleChange = (event: React.ChangeEvent<HTMLInputElement>) => {
    const newValue = event.target.value; // The new value entered by the user
    apiRef.current.setEditCellValue({ id, field, value: newValue });
  };

  return <input type="text" value={value} onChange={handleChange}>;
}
```

The demo below implements a custom edit component, based on [Rating](https://mui.com/components/rating) from MUI Core, for the Rating column.

{{"demo": "CustomEditComponent.js", "bg": "inline", "defaultCodeOpen": false}}

### With debounce

By default, each call to `apiRef.current.setEditCellValue` triggers a new render.
If the edit component requires the user to type a new value, re-rendering the grid too often will drastically reduce performance.
One way to avoid that is to debounce the API calls.

> Fortunally, `apiRef.current.setEditCellValue` provides support for debouncing out-of-box by setting the `debounceMs` param to a positive integer.

Author: I replaced "Fortunatelly" with "To help with that". I don't like to start a phrase with code.

Usually it requires two clicks to change the value of the cell: one to select a new value and another click outside to save.
This second click can be avoided if the first click also stops the edit mode.
To create an edit component with auto-stop, call `apiRef.current.stopCellEditMode` after setting the new value.
Since `apiRef.current.setEditCellValue` may do additional processing, it is necessary to first wait for it to resolve before stopping the edit mode.
Also, it is a good practice to check if `apiRef.current.setEditCellValue` returned `true`.
It will be `false` if `preProcessEditProps` set an error during [validation](#validation).

```tsx
const handleChange = async (event: SelectChangeEvent) => {
  const isValid = await apiRef.current.setEditCellValue({
    id,
    field,
    value: event.target.value,
  });

  if (isValid) {
    apiRef.current.stopCellEditMode({ id, field });
  }
};
```

The demo below implements an edit component with auto-stop, based on a native [Select](https://mui.com/components/selects), for the Role column.

{{"demo": "AutoStopEditComponent.js", "bg": "inline", "defaultCodeOpen": false}}

> > ⚠ We don't recommend using edit components in columns that use long-running `preProcessEditCellProps` because the UI will freeze while waiting for `apiRef.current.setEditCellValue`.

Author: I missed "edit components with auto-stop".

## Row editing

Row editing allows to edit all the cells of a row at once.
It is based on the cell editing, thus everything from this guide applies to it too.
To enable it, change the `editMode` prop to `"row"`, then set normally the `editable` property in the definition of the columns that should be editable.

```tsx
<DataGrid editMode="row" columns={[{ field: 'name', editable: true }]} />
```

Below there is a demo with row editing.
To [start](#start-editing) and [stop](#stop-editing) editing use the same shortcuts from the cell editing (e.g. double-clicking a cell).

{{"demo": "BasicRowEditingGrid.js", "bg": "inline", "defaultCodeOpen": false}}

> > ⚠ By design, when changing the value of a cell all `preProcessEditCellProps` callbacks from other columns are also called.

Author: The issue is #3763. Here's the proof that `hasChanged` solves the problem: https://codesandbox.io/s/datagridpro-v5-quick-start-forked-qq4y1d?file=/src/App.tsx

```tsx
<DataGrid columns={[{ field: 'name', editable: true }]} />
```

This will allow to edit any cell from the specified column.
By default, the cell editing mode is assumed, meaning that only a single cell can have its mode equals to `"edit"` each time.
To edit simultaneously all cells of a row, you can use the row editing mode, accessible by setting the `editMode` prop to `"row"`.
For more information, see the dedicated [section](#row-editing).

The following demo shows an example of how to make all columns editable.
Play with it by double-clicking or pressing <kbd class="key">Enter</kbd> in any cell from this column.

{{"demo": "BasicEditingGrid.js", "bg": "inline", "defaultCodeOpen": false}}

### Start editing

There are a few ways to start editing a cell (or a row if `editMode="row"`):

- Double-clicking a cell.
- Pressing <kbd class="key">Enter</kbd>, <kbd class="key">Backspace</kbd> or <kbd class="key">Delete</kbd>.
  Note that when you press the <kbd class="key">Backspace</kbd> or <kbd class="key">Delete</kbd> key, any existing content in the cell will be deleted.
- Pressing any printable key, for instance `a`, `E`, `0`, or `$`.

> - Calling `apiRef.current.startCellEditMode` passing the row ID and column field of the cell to edit.

Author: Is "to pass" right here? `apiRef.current.startCellEditMode` is a function and I want to say that the row ID and the column field needs to be passed to it.

## Value parser and value setter

A value parser allows to modify the value entered by the user.
It can be used, for instance, to convert the value sent by the edit component to a different format.
To do so, use the `valueParser` property of the column definition:

```tsx
const columns: GridColDef[] = [
  {
    valueParser: (value: GridCellValue, params: GridCellParams) => {
      return value.toLowerCase();
    },
  },
];
```

On the other hand, a value setter customizes how the row is updated with the new value.
If you are already using a `valueGetter` to extract the value from a nested object, then the `valueSetter` will do the inverse task.
To do so, use the `valueSetter` property of the column definition.
It will be called with an object containing the new value to be saved and the row where this value belongs to.

```tsx
const columns: GridColDef[] = [
  {
    valueSetter: (params: GridValueSetterParams) => {
      const [firstName, lastName] = params.value!.toString().split(' ');
      return { ...params.row, firstName, lastName };
    },
  },
];
```

In the following demo, both value parser and value setter were defined for the "Full name" column.

> The value parser converts the value entered to uppercase while the value setter splits the value and saves it correctly into the row model:

Author: I changed "converts the value entered to uppercase" -> "capitalizes" because the demo is not converting everything to uppercase now, only the first letter of each word.

{{"demo": "ValidateServerNameGrid.js", "bg": "inline", "defaultCodeOpen": false}}

> ⚠ If an interaction that saves and stops editing (e.g. pressing <kbd class="key">Enter</kbd>) occurs while processing the props, the changes made are discarded and the cell will immediatelly exit the edit mode.
> To avoid losing the changes, it is import to provide some feedback to users about the ongoing processing.
> You can use the `isProcessingProps` prop to show a loader while waiting for the server to respond.

## Persistence

After executing one of the [stop editing](#stop-editing) interactions, the `processRowUpdate` prop will be called.
Use this prop to send the new values to the server and save it into a database or other storage method.
The prop is called with two arguments: the first being the updated row with the new values, and after passing through the value setter, and the second is the row before the current cell or row has entered the edit mode (a.k.a the original row).
Once the row was saved, `processRowUpdate` must return the row object that will be used to update the internal state.

> This value returned is used as argument to a call to `apiRef.current.updateRows`.

Author: I wanted to say that what `processRowUpdate` returns is passed to `apiRef.current.updateRows`.

If while calling `processRowUpdate` you need to cancel the save process, like when a database validation fails or the user wants to reject the changes, there are two options:

- Reject the promise to not update the internal state and keep the cell in edit mode.
- Resolve the promise with the second argument (the original row) received to make it stop silently, not updating the internal state but exiting the edit mode.

The next demo implements the first option.
Instead of [validating](#validation) while typing, it validates in the server.
If the new name is empty it will not allow to save and the cell is kept into edit mode.
Also, it shows that `processRowUpdate` can be used to pre-process the row model that will be saved into the internal state.
To leave the edit mode, press <kbd class="key">Escape</kbd> or enter a valid name.

{{"demo": "ServerSidePersistence.js", "bg": "inline", "defaultCodeOpen": false}}

### Ask confirmation before save

> The second option to cancel the save process allows the user to reject the changes and return immediatelly to the view mode.

Author: I used "resolving the promise with the second argument" instead of "resolving the promise".

> This is acomplished by resolving `processRowUpdate` with the second argument.

Author: "second argument" might be repetitive since I used it X too but I left it anyway.

    const newValue = event.target.value; // The new value entered by the user
    apiRef.current.setEditCellValue({ id, field, value: newValue });
  };

  return <input type="text" value={value} onChange={handleChange}>;
}
```

The demo below implements a custom edit component, based on [Rating](https://mui.com/components/rating) from `@mui/material`, for the Rating column.

{{"demo": "CustomEditComponent.js", "bg": "inline", "defaultCodeOpen": false}}

### With debounce

By default, each call to `apiRef.current.setEditCellValue` triggers a new render.
If the edit component requires the user to type a new value, re-rendering the grid too often will drastically reduce performance.
One way to avoid that is to debounce the API calls.
To help with that, `apiRef.current.setEditCellValue` handles debouncing out-of-box by setting the `debounceMs` param to a positive integer.
Once a value, corresponding to the number of milliseconds, is given no matter how many times the API method is called a new render will only occurs after the specifid amount of time has passed.

```tsx
apiRef.current.setEditCellValue({ id, field, value: newValue, debounceMs: 200 });
```

> Since now a new render only occurs after some time has passed, the `value` prop will not be updated on each `apiRef.current.setEditCellValue` call.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When the grid is only set to re-render after a given period of time has passed, the `value` prop will not be updated on each `apiRef.current.setEditCellValue` call.
```

> To avoid frozen UIs, the edit component can keep the current value in an internal state and sync it once `value` changes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To avoid a frozen UI, the edit component can keep the current value in an internal state and sync it once `value` changes.
```

> To do that apply the following modifications to your edit compoment.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Modify the edit component to enable this feature:
```

```diff
 function CustomEditComponent(props: GridRenderEditCellParams) {
-  const { id, value, field } = props;
+  const { id, value: valueProp, field } = props;
+  const [value, setValue] = React.useState(valueProp);
   const apiRef = useGridApiContext();

   const handleChange = (event: React.ChangeEvent<HTMLInputElement>) => {
     const newValue = event.target.value; // The new value entered by the user
-    apiRef.current.setEditCellValue({ id, field, value: newValue });
+    apiRef.current.setEditCellValue({ id, field, value: newValue, debounceMs: 200 });
+    setValue(newValue);
   };

+  React.useEffect(() => {
+    setValue(valueProp);
+  }, [valueProp]);
+
   return <input type="text" value={value} onChange={handleChange}>;
}
```

### With auto-stop

> An edit component has an "auto-stop" behavior when it stops the edit mode as soon as the value is changed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An edit component has "auto-stop" behavior when it stops edit mode as soon as the value is changed.
```

> To picture better, imagine an edit component with a combo, created following the steps above.

Reviewer: "Steps above" is unclear—which steps exactly?

Author: I added a link.

> By default, it would require two clicks to change the value of the cell: one click to select a new value and another click outside to save.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By default, it would require two clicks to change the value of the cell: one click inside the cell to select a new value, and another click outside the cell to save.
```

This second click can be avoided if the first click also stops the edit mode.
To create an edit component with auto-stop, call `apiRef.current.stopCellEditMode` after setting the new value.

> Since `apiRef.current.setEditCellValue` may do additional processing, it is necessary to first wait for it to resolve before stopping the edit mode.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since `apiRef.current.setEditCellValue` may do additional processing, you must wait for it to resolve before stopping the edit mode.
```

> Also, it is a good practice to check if `apiRef.current.setEditCellValue` returned `true`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Also, it is a good practice to check if `apiRef.current.setEditCellValue` has returned `true`.
```

It will be `false` if `preProcessEditProps` set an error during [validation](#validation).

```tsx
const handleChange = async (event: SelectChangeEvent) => {
  const isValid = await apiRef.current.setEditCellValue({
    id,
    field,
    value: event.target.value,
  });

  if (isValid) {
    apiRef.current.stopCellEditMode({ id, field });
  }
};
```

> The demo below implements an edit component with auto-stop, based on a native [Select](https://mui.com/components/selects), for the Role column.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following demo implements an edit component with auto-stop, based on a native [`Select`](https://mui.com/components/selects) component for the **Role** column.
```

{{"demo": "AutoStopEditComponent.js", "bg": "inline", "defaultCodeOpen": false}}

> > ⚠ We don't recommend using edit components with auto-stop in columns that use long-running `preProcessEditCellProps` because the UI will freeze while waiting for `apiRef.current.setEditCellValue`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> ⚠ **Note:** We don't recommend using edit components with auto-stop in columns that use long-running `preProcessEditCellProps` because the UI will freeze while waiting for `apiRef.current.setEditCellValue`.
```

> > Instead, use the provided stop editing interactions to stop the edit mode.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> Instead, use the provided interactions to exit edit mode.
```

## Row editing

> Row editing allows to edit all the cells of a row at once.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Row editing lets the user edit all cells in a row simultaneously.
```

> It is based on the cell editing, so everything written above remains valid.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The same basic rules for cell editing also apply to row editing.
```

> To enable it, change the `editMode` prop to `"row"`, then set normally the `editable` property in the definition of the columns that should be editable.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To enable it, change the `editMode` prop to `"row"`, then follow the same guidelines as those for cell editing to set the `editable` property in the definition of the columns that the user can edit.
```

```tsx
<DataGrid editMode="row" columns={[{ field: 'name', editable: true }]} />
```

> Below there is a demo with row editing.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following demo illustrates how row editing works.
```

> To [start](#start-editing) and [stop](#stop-editing) editing use the same shortcuts from the cell editing (e.g. double-clicking a cell).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The user can [start](#start-editing) and [stop](#stop-editing) editing a row using the same actions as those provided for cell editing (e.g. double-clicking a cell).
```

{{"demo": "BasicRowEditingGrid.js", "bg": "inline", "defaultCodeOpen": false}}

> > ⚠ By design, when changing the value of a cell all `preProcessEditCellProps` callbacks from other columns are also called.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> ⚠ **Note:** when changing the value of a cell, all `preProcessEditCellProps` callbacks from other columns are also called.
```

> > This happens to allow conditional validation (explained below) where the value of a cell impacts on the validation status of a another cell in the same row.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> This lets you apply conditional validation where the value of a cell impacts the validation status of another cell in the same row.
```

> > To only run validation if the value has changed check if the `hasChanged` param is `true`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> If you only want to run validation when the value has changed, check if the `hasChanged` param is `true`.
```

### Conditional validation

> Having all cells of a row in edit mode allows validating a field based on the value of another one.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When all cells in a row are in edit mode, you can validate fields by comparing their values against one another.
```

> To do that, start by adding the `preProcessEditCellProps` as explained in the [validation](#validation) section.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To do this, start by adding the `preProcessEditCellProps` as explained in the [validation](#validation) section.
```

> When the callback is called, it will have an additional `otherFieldsProps` param contaning the props from the other fields in the same row.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When the callback is called, it will have an additional `otherFieldsProps` param containing the props from the other fields in the same row.
```

Use this param to check if the value from the current column is valid or not.

> Return normally the modified `props` containing the error.

Reviewer: I'm assuming "normally" here refers to "the way it's done for cell editing."

```suggestion
Return the modified `props` containing the error as you would for cell editing.
```

> Once at the least one field has the `error` attribute equals to a truthy value the row will not leave the edit mode.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once at the least one field has the `error` attribute set to a truthy value, the row will not exit edit mode.
```

> The following demo requires a value for the "Payment method" column only if the "Is paid?" column was checked.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following demo requires a value for the **Payment method** column only if the **Is paid?** column is checked:
```

{{"demo": "ConditionalValidationGrid.js", "disableAd": true, "bg": "inline", "defaultCodeOpen": false}}

> ### Full-featured CRUD [<span class="plan-pro"></span>](https://mui.com/store/items/material-ui-pro/)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Full-featured CRUD app [<span class="plan-pro"></span>](https://mui.com/store/items/material-ui-pro/)
```

> The row editing makes possible to create a full-featured CRUD similar to those found in enterprise applications.

Reviewer: I think it's worthwhile to spell out what CRUD stands for in case the reader hasn't encountered this acronym before.

```suggestion
Row editing makes it possible to create a full-featured CRUD (Create, Read, Update, Delete) app similar to those found in enterprise applications.
```

Author: I used "component" instead of "app".

By default, only one cell at a time can have its `editMode` prop set to `"edit"`.
To let your users edit all cells in a given row simultaneously, set the `editMode` prop to `"row"`.
For more information, see [the section on row editing](#row-editing).

The following demo shows an example of how to make all columns editable.
Play with it by double-clicking or pressing <kbd class="key">Enter</kbd> in any cell from this column:

{{"demo": "BasicEditingGrid.js", "bg": "inline", "defaultCodeOpen": false}}

### Start editing

Users can start editing a cell (or row if `editMode="row"`) with any of the following actions:

- Double-clicking a cell
- Pressing <kbd class="key">Enter</kbd>, <kbd class="key">Backspace</kbd> or <kbd class="key">Delete</kbd>—note that the latter two options both delete any existing content
- Pressing any printable key, such as <kbd class="key">a</kbd>, <kbd class="key">E</kbd>, <kbd class="key">0</kbd>, or <kbd class="key">$</kbd>
- Calling `apiRef.current.startCellEditMode` passing the row ID and column field of the cell to be edited

  ```tsx
  apiRef.current.startCellEditMode({ id: 1, field: 'name' });
  ```

> - Calling `apiRef.current.startRowEditMode` passing the ID of the row (only available if `editMode="row"`).

Reviewer: Drop the period here.

```suggestion
- Calling `apiRef.current.startRowEditMode` passing the ID of the row (only available if `editMode="row"`)
```

The `preProcessEditCellProps` callback is called with an object containing the following attributes:

- `id`: the row ID
- `row`: the row model containing the value(s) of the cell or row before entering edit mode
- `props`: the props, containing the value after the value parser, that are passed to the edit component
- `hasChanged`: determines if `props.value` is different from the last time this callback was called

Data validation is one type of pre-processing that can be done in this way.
To validate the data entered, pass a callback to `preProcessEditCellProps` checking if `props.value` is valid.
If the new value is invalid, set `props.error` to a truthy value and return the modified props, as shown in the example below.
When the user tries to save the updated value, the change will be rejected if the error attribute is truthy (invalid).

```tsx
const columns: GridColDef[] = [
  {
    field: 'firstName',
    preProcessEditCellProps: (params: GridPreProcessEditCellProps) => {
      const hasError = params.props.value.length < 3;
      return { ...params.props, error: hasError };
    },
  },
];
```

> > ⚠ Changing `props.value` inside the callback has no effect. To pre-process it, use a [value parser](#value-parser-and-value-setter).

Author: The value setter is only to pre-process the value. `preProcessEditCellProps` allows to pre-process the props.

> > ⚠ Changing `props.value` inside the callback has no effect. To pre-process it, use a [value parser](#value-parser-and-value-setter).

Reviewer 4: > @joserodolfofreitas Can you reproduce this bug in the last stable version?

yes.

> This date separator is weird. Which locale are you using?

based on https://www.localeplanet.com/support/browser.html

navigator.browserLanguage: undefined
navigator.language: en-GB
navigator.userAgent: Mozilla/5.0 (Macintosh; Intel Mac OS X 10_15_7) AppleWebKit/537.36 (KHTML, like Gecko) Chrome/99.0.4844.51 Safari/537.36
date: Fri Mar 18 2022 12:56:04 GMT-0300 (Brasilia Standard Time)
date.toLocaleDateString(): 3/18/2022
date.toLocaleTimeString(): 12:56:04 PM
date.toLocaleString(): 3/18/2022, 12:56:04 PM
date.toUTCString(): Fri, 18 Mar 2022 15:56:04 GMT
date.getTimezoneOffset(): 180

> > ⚠ Changing `props.value` inside the callback has no effect. To pre-process it, use a [value parser](#value-parser-and-value-setter).

Author: Coming back to this discussion. Currently, only the `value` prop has a method to update it: `setEditCellValue`. The other props added via `preProcessEditCellProps` can't be changed. We could re-add the `setEditCellProps` method that existed in the past. In this way, other information could be stored in the props, not only the error.

> This lets you apply conditional validation where the value of a cell impacts the validation status of another cell in the same row.
> If you only want to run validation when the value has changed, check if the `hasChanged` param is `true`.

### Conditional validation

When all cells in a row are in edit mode, you can validate fields by comparing their values against one another.
To do this, start by adding the `preProcessEditCellProps` as explained in the [validation](#validation) section.
When the callback is called, it will have an additional `otherFieldsProps` param containing the props from the other fields in the same row.
Use this param to check if the value from the current column is valid or not.
Return the modified `props` containing the error as you would for cell editing.
Once at the least one field has the `error` attribute set to a truthy value, the row will not exit edit mode.

The following demo requires a value for the **Payment method** column only if the **Is paid?** column is checked:

{{"demo": "ConditionalValidationGrid.js", "disableAd": true, "bg": "inline", "defaultCodeOpen": false}}

> ### Full-featured CRUD component [<span class="plan-pro"></span>](https://mui.com/store/items/material-ui-pro/)

Reviewer 4: I'm curious, is this a "Pro feature" only because it's using apiRef?

Author: Yes.
